---
Title: Collective Memory and American Placenames
Tags: nottingham
Place: nottingham
Date: 27-06-2017
Author: Clare Tandy
Template: blog-post
---
When we learned about memory in Psych 1, the main takeaway was it's fallibility. Each person’s individual memory is colored by their feelings, other memories, people surrounding them, how many times you’ve remembered it and re-encoded it, any number of indiscernible factors. But what I've been struck by on this trip is the power of collective memory to semi-accurately reconstruct past events, keeping at least a grain of accuracy.

I visited London and Cambridge ten years ago, and a lot of the latter half of this trip has been revisiting places I've been and seeing them through new, older eyes. The strangest things stick out: in the Roman frescoes in the marble spiraling staircase outside the mummy exhibit in the British museum I had the oddest sense of being in two times at once, and there were flashes of recognition upon my first sight of the market in Cambridge. But I completely misremembered the scale and location of the Rosetta Stone, editing out the crowds of people around it.

Visiting the other places on the trip have all been a rich source of new memories, new places, new ideas. We’ve learned to look at landscapes in a different way, essentially as a way to reconstruct lost collective memory. A single place name can indicate the uses of the land, who would have gone there, those in charge, the vernacular language in use or the type and language of administration, and clusters can reconstruct changing political climates, regions with particular economic strengths or weaknesses, topographical features, and more.

Why are placenames capable of recording these? I'd argue that it's because, in essence, place names are a way of identifying a place in the existing framework of cultural memory. As we’ve discussed on the trip, it doesn't help us to know that the boundary is at Aethelward’s tree, or that it was the road the Prince once rode down - we can make an educated guess based on other geographical factors and base usefulness, but don’t know. 

At a certain point, these placenames transition from being descriptive to words that accrue cultural memory and meaning in their own right. Individuals use these names to hang memories on, whether it's from living there for 30 years and making it a part of their identity or using them as a repository for the transient memories of travel. 

From a historical perspective, it is the deindividuated nature of placenames that makes them a valuable record. A certain critical mass of people must understand them in order for them to be useful. While attestations are frequently individual, they aren’t truly individual in the way that literarily sources frequently are. Diaries, journals, letters, heavily edited books all provide the reader with _one_ perspective on the past, colored by the writer’s biases and choices. But placenames, and specifically their early attestations, allow us understand something both about what sticks in memory and how the landscape would have been experienced by those living there 1500 years ago. This record of collective memory then is where that grain of accuracy is preserved; waiting to be picked out and worked into a greater understanding of both the past and human memory.

However, for placenames to function in this way they must be organic, rather than ascribed by a central power or organizational structure. This is an important distinction, because in many cases the ascribed name instead projects a hope of what type of place it _will_ become, not necessarily what it is. These are the types of names that commonly remain in places painted over with the harsh brush of colonialism, with the Americas as an example. 

I’ve thought a lot on this trip about how to apply the study of place names as it has been described to us by Professor Jayne Carroll is to someplace like the United States, where there is a much accelerated history of re-naming places. While some names draw languages of the people native to the area  (Seattle, Mississippi, Tulsa), others are from Spanish colonization (Santa Barbara, Palo Alto ), French exploration (Detroit, Eau Claire), British colonization (Georgia, New York), and some are mishmashes of multiple, creative, or named for people important to the area (Michigan, Phoenix, Philadelphia, Austin). These are examples just from the names of states and relatively major cities, but even with that quick survey they begin to show patterns of settlement, relative treatments of existing populations, from forcible Christianization, tenuous coexistence - Michigan being a french version of an Ojibwe word, and obliteration. In this way place names in America show, in addition to aspects of a place - like clear water - patterns and types of settlement in ways very similar to what we’ve seen along the Welsh border and in the eastern portion of England.

But these place names are very much in recorded memory, and while some maintain a geographical description of the landscape or the area’s use, the past it brings up is much more recent - Orange County grew oranges within living memory. 

We also have other records of these types of settlement, charters and incorporations that establish named places, more than just codifying an existing one. They come from a world of maps, where identifying a town by a dot and a name was good enough, since you could find it through other means. These were names that were born beyond being descriptive, which means the layers of meaning they accrue after their instantiation are ever more important. Why is the name of a Catholic saint associated with a strong tradition of gay pride? A strait of Lake Erie with automobile manufacturing? 

United States place names provide a greatly accelerated and structured version of creating meaning in different cultural frameworks and memories that get mashed together, skipping or abbreviating the transitional period. Frankly, most are really new, like many things in the United States, so the type of  deep digging back into the past that we’ve experienced isn’t part of what they have to teach us.

They represent a different type of collective memory; one more often than not imposed on the people living there that is eventually accepted and incorporated. In a way they’re false memories, implanted on a landscape that once held different descriptions and meaning, much of which has been wiped away to start anew. Memory fails when those who remember are gone, and collective memory fails when the things that are meant to be remembered are simply replaced.

