---
Title: Digital Media and Landscape
Tags: montgomery
Place: montgomery
Date: 06-07-2017
Author: Kiana Pancino
Template: blog-post
---
After spending the last week and a half exploring much of the English landscape through a GoPro lens, I wanted to take some time to discuss digital media and how the process of creating videos has influenced my understanding and interpretation of the world around me.  My main goal throughout this entire process has been to try to capture these specific and unique moments that we experience as a whole throughout the seminar in order to try and translate them to the outside world.  Video enables me to preserve events in a way that photos are unable to, which provides me with a unique edge in documenting our adventures.  Additionally, with the unique capabilities of videography in recording movement and sound, it then challenges me to find new and different ways of viewing the landscape around me.  At every new location we arrive at, I have to not only view and take in the surroundings around me, but I also have to analyze them and determine how I can best communicate this to my audience, as wells as how I can make it exciting for them by providing them with shots and movements that are refreshing to the human eye level and sight.  As a result, videotaping encourages me to not only view my landscape under a different lens, but to also appreciate and acknowledge its history and presence.  Although, by that same point, there then arises the difficulty of how to accurately portray the beauty and authenticity of many of these locations through a digital screen, while at the same time being able to convey the respect and importance that they demand.  At the end of the day, a couple shots of some cathedrals and castles will never be able to replace the feeling and experience you get by exploring the landscape in person for yourself, which is where digital media often falls short.  Additionally, digital media can also be a disadvantage to the videographer because they are often so focused on the end result, creating a video, that they can forget to take a step back to just take in and remember the landscape for what it is.  I know that I have definitely fallen victim to that this last week, because I am not only concerned about recording and documenting our journey, but I also feel under pressure to perform for my audience in order to do justice to the landscape I am communicating.  However despite these disadvantages, I believe that the process of creating and editing videos this trip has helped me gain a different level of understanding and appreciation for the landscape that I am in, one that I would have never been able to reach otherwise.  Digital media has its limitations, but at the same times those limitations enable us to take control over them in order to manipulate and experiment with these recorded moments to create a unique story for our audience, our story.  