---
Title: Ely and Peterborough
Tags: place
Author: Sarah Phillips and Kiana Pancino
Filters: ely-peterborough
Template: index
Place: ely-peterborough
img: img/ely.jpg
video_cap: "<i>For footage from this site, see <a href='places?cambridge'>Cambridge</a></i>"
---

###Ely
Situated in northeastern England, 14 miles northeast of Cambridge and 80 miles northeast of London, the Isle of Ely rests near the River Great Ouse as a modern cathedral city with deep medieval and Romano-British roots. There is evidence of a Roman road, now called Akeman Street, running through multiple modern cities, including Ely, alluding to Ely’s long withstanding importance. The origin and meaning of the name “Isle of Ely” has long been disputed by place-name scholars, but the most widely accepted translation of the medieval Latin Elge is “island of eels” or “eel island”, referring to the creatures caught in the River Great Ouse for food. Today, however, Ely is no longer an island in swampy fenland, as the fens were drained in the 16th century to make the once impenetrable island more accessible. The place-name lives on as a connection to the historical significance of its landscape.

While historical records of Ely date back as far as the Romano-British period, but our focus is the Anglo-Saxon times, when the Isle was controlled by the Anglo-Saxon tribe, the Gyrwas. Then, in approximately 652 C.E., the Prince of the Gyrwas, Prince Tondbert, married Princess Æthelthryth of East Anglia (one of King Onna of East Anglia’s four daughters), and presented her with the Isle of Ely as a wedding present. Why present his bride with an island in the middle of swampy fenlands? The Isle of Ely has long been regarded as an easily defendable area of land, as the physical surrounding landscape is difficult to navigate. Landscapes of defense were extremely important during the medieval period, as there was a lot of political unrest. In 673 C.E., Æthelthryth founded an abbey on the Isle of Ely, called the Church of St. Etheldreda and St. Peter. The abbey survived until 870, when the Danes destroyed the abbey and captured Ely, making it apart of Danelaw, a Viking kingdom which was comprised of the former kingdoms of East Anglia, parts of Mercia and parts of Northumbria. Then, in 970, about 16 years after the end of Viking rule in England, Æthelwold, Bishop of Winchester, rebuilt the abbey in the Isle of Ely as a Benedictine abbey in his campaign to restore various religious land after Viking rule. Following William the Conqueror’s conquest of England, Ely appears in the Doomsday book as having approximately 110 households and four parishes (c. 1086). During this time, construction on a new cathedral to replace Æthelwold’s abbey had begun under the supervision of a Norman abbot, Simeon. Ely’s status as a cathedral city was granted in 1109, even though the cathedral wasn’t fully constructed until 1375. This cathedral, especially with its distinctive octagonal central tower, is considered today to be a great medieval architectural achievement.

Ely’s cathedral demonstrated much of the historical significance of the isle throughout the medieval period, but Ely contains many other areas of significance, such as Cherry Hill. At first glance, the hill today appears to provide solely a great view of Ely’s cathedral. However, following archeological excavations in the early 2000s, it is evident that Cherry Hill was once the site of Ely Castle, a motte and bailey castle that dates back to Henry I’s reign (c. 1100-1135). While the origin of motte and bailey castles are unknown, they were extremely common fortifications built across Europe form the 10th to the 13th century, comprised of a castle keep situated on a raised earthwork (motte), accompanied by an enclosed courtyard (bailey) and surrounded by a ditch and palisade. Ely Castle’s history begins with Hereward the Wake (meaning “army guard the watchful”) and his leadership of the local resistance to the Norman conquest in 1066. William the Conqueror finally defeated Hereward the Wake in the fenland surrounding Ely in 1071, and abandoned the castle. Then, during the Anarchy (1135-1154), the castle was refortified by a supported of Matilda, Bishop Nigel, until he surrendered in 1140. King Stephen then gifted the castle to Geoffrey de Mandeville in 1143, making him the first Earl of Essex. Ely Castle’s history comes to an obscure and abrupt end when it was destroyed in either 1216 by Falkes de Breauté or in 1268 during the Second Baron’s War, when Ely and its fortifications were captured and destroyed.

Following the medieval period, Ely disappears from the spotlight until the mid-17th century, when King Charles I ordered the fenlands to be drained for agricultural purposes. Since then, the place-name “Isle of Ely” has ceased to embody it’s meaning and has begun to reference a distant, medieval past. In the 21st century, various excavations have started to uncover the mystery of Ely’s historic past, placing most of the physical evidence recovered on public display at the Ely History Museum.

###Peterborough
Peterborough was an attractive location for people looking for a permanent settlement because of its ideal location next to the Nene River, which provided fertile land and an abundance of food and building resources.  We know this from scholars and Benedictine monks, such as Hugh Candidus, who were in charge of documenting history and events of Peterborough and other cities alike.  During the Anglo-Saxon period, the region was ruled by a Pagan king named Penda, from 626-655.  Eventually his son Peada took control, and in addition to introducing  Christianity, he also founded a monastery in the location of the current cathedral in 656, named Medeshamstede.  The name Medeshamstede means “homestead in the meadows,” but 12th century scholars have also tied its origins to a nearby spring called Medes well.  A town slowly developed around the new monastery, until a Viking invasion in 870.  It was not until a century later when the church would be restored by Aethelwold of Winchester, who claimed to be visited by God and was told to visit the ancient monastery of St. Peter and restore it. 
    
The new structure was surrounded by an earth bank and wooden fence in order to keep out the advancing Danes and to help protect the new building. As a result, the new construction was called a burgh, meaning “a fortified place,” and later received the name Peterburgh when it was dedicated to St. Peter.  

The protections however proved ineffective, as t he church was destroyed again in 1070 by a local rebel leader named Hereward the Wake and his army of Danes and Saxons who were attempting to overthrow WIlliam the Conqueror.  In this endeavor, Hereward gained access to the city by burning down the buildings next to the main gate, resulting in the rest of the city, along with the monastery, being burned to the ground.  In response to this attack, the abbot at the time decided to construct a motte and bailey castle made out of wood just north of where the church once stood.  Even though the castle still no longer stands, the mound that it was once built on can still be seen from the cathedral grounds today.  
    
Unfortunately, Peterborough seemed to have bad luck with fires, because again in 1116 a fire that was attributed to drunkenness among the monks burned down not only the entire monastery, but the entire town as well.  All of the religious documents within the church were also destroyed, forcing the monks to copy the records from other religious institutions in the surrounding area, such as the Anglo-Saxon chronicles.  During this time, Peterborough was under Norman rule, meaning that in addition to having French become the new official language, all historical records previously taken by great churches slowly began to die out.  Despite this, the monks in Peterborough continued to record events and even use Middle and Old English in their publications, making the Peterborough chronicle a unique and significant source even though it’s manuscripts end in 1154.  Those documents are preserved to this day inside Oxford library.  

The monks began building a new church and town in 1118, but the difference this time being that the abbot decided to build out the town westward instead of eastward, as it had been previously.  The street layout and marketplace of Peterborough today largely resembles this layout, and can be seen in modern street names such as Cowgate and Westgate.  Both of these road names came into being in that period are derived from the Danish word ‘gaeta’ for street.  Eventually in 1539 when King Henry VIII broke away from the Roman Catholic Church and began dissolving the monasteries, Peterborough was one of the lucky few that instead of being destroyed or sold off, was transformed into a cathedral.  The factor that many believe to be the motivation behind this decision, was that Katherine of Aragon, his first wife, was buried inside the church in 1536 after her death in the neighboring Kimbolton castle.  

Another unique feature about Peterborough cathedral is the portrait of the man that sits above the entrance to the cathedral.  This painting is of a man named Robert Scarlett, also known as Old Scarlett, who lived to be 98 years old and was the famous gravedigger of Peterborough.  In addition to being rumoured to have buried at least two people of every household in the town, Old Scarlett also buried two queens, Katherine Queen of England and Mary Queen of Scots, which are arguably the most notable burials of his entire life.  In honor of Old Scarlett’s involvement and dedication to the church and the community, he not only has his portrait on display for all to see as mentioned earlier, but he also has a beautiful poem written about him in his honor.  

